```
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial
4.0 International Licence.
```
# Thoughts on Dying: Designing a Mortality

# probe to elicit reflections on existential meaning

#### First name/s Last name/sa, First name/s Last name/sb LEAVE BLANK FOR INITIAL

#### SUBMISSION^

aAffiliation name LEAVE BLANK FOR INITIAL SUBMISSION

bAffiliation name LEAVE BLANK FOR INITIAL SUBMISSION

*Corresponding author e-mail: LEAVE BLANK FOR INITIAL SUBMISSION

https://doi.org/10.21606/drs.2026.XXX LEAVE BLANK FOR INITIAL SUBMISSION

```
Abstract : Although designing for well-being is often focused on integration of physical
and emotional health, purpose and meaning are its more elusive aspects that are often
difficult to design for. This paper explores existential meaning in a secular context. In a
research-through-design project we developed a mortality probe that creates
mortality awareness and helps people reflect on their existential meaning. The
mortality probe was designed as an ambient, e-paper screen-based device showing the
participant’s age in various formats together with existential prompts and it was used
by five participants. The probe elicited a rich set of reflections in the form of beliefs,
values and worldviews and the participants characterized the experience as fruitful
and generally positive. Member checking indicated that the guided introspection
enabled by the probe can influence individual wellbeing positively and promote pro-
social behaviour.
```
```
Keywords : Existential meaning; Design for Death; Design probes; Research-through-design
```
## 1. Introduction

#### The answer to the ultimate question of life, the universe, and everything may still be

#### unresolved but reflecting on such existential questions about meaning and/or having a

#### greater sense of meaning plays a vital role in our physical and psychological well-being.

#### In this study we have looked specifically how the use of what we call a Mortality probe can

#### elicit thoughts and reflections about what existential meaning is for people without religious

#### affiliation. The reason to choose a secular context was to probe how people engage in and

#### reflect about the existential meaning-making inherent to their own experience that is not

#### tied to a specific religious system. Additionally, while existential meaning can include

#### spirituality, it mainly relates to individual’s sense of purpose, values and belonging (Reker,

#### 2000). This is important because there is evidence that having a sense of meaning can help

#### us face difficult situations and improve several aspects of life. There have been several

#### mechanisms proposed with varying degrees of evidence on how a sense of meaning in life

#### can be linked to physical health (Hooker et al., 2018a). This for example includes buffering


_AUTHOR’S NAMES (LEAVE BLANK) [x Running head even]_

#### stress by making stressful life events less uncontrollable, promotion the sue of active

#### problem-focused coping and motivating engagement in healthy behaviours. Moreover, it is

#### also argued that meaning in life has important implications for social and economic well-

#### being which are seen as critical ingredients for societal flourishing (Routledge & FioRito,

#### 2021a).

#### In light of this, we argue that it is crucial that designing for well-being is inclusive of topics

#### such as existential angst and mortality which may be overlooked because of its taboo or

#### elusive nature. As a case in point, in the field of ‘design for death’, there is a significant lack

#### of service and system-level design contributions as compared to tangible objects (Tibbles &

#### Nickpour, 2022). This suggests that design seems to be more focused on the logistics of

#### death rather than the intangible, subjective experience of the meaning-making aspects of

#### design for death. To explore this sensitive design space, we situate our work in the design for

#### death space while aiming to contribute to the broader design for wellbeing space,

#### specifically in existential health.

#### In this paper, we present the Mortality probe, an e-paper screen-based device that raises

#### mortality salience, i.e. awareness of one’s impending death by showing the participant’s age

#### in various formats as a context creator. The probe then uses that context to prompt the

#### participants to reflect and document their thoughts on daily existential questions relating to

#### both life and death. The probe was used as an artifact to create new knowledge in a

#### research-through-design (RtD) approach as part of a master’s thesis by the first author. The

#### thesis was also broader in wherein exploring existential meaning during humanist funerals

#### was its central part it also focused on the construction and operationalization of existential

#### meaning as a service design material. The focus of this paper remains on the Mortality probe

#### and the question of how can the design of a probe support the emergence of existential

#### meaning through reflections about mortality. The probe specifically aligns with the ‘probing’

#### typology of RtD experimentation which is characterized by the exploration of emergent

#### design opportunities and the fostering of curiosity in neighbouring areas of research (Krogh

#### et al., 2015a). Additionally, the probe enables explorations relevant for the broader area of

#### designing for existential health.

## 2. The meaning of meaning

#### There are many ways in which meaning is understood to contribute to wellbeing. For

#### instance, it has been suggested that having a feeling that life is the way it is because one has

#### a solid foundation of meaning, rather than on biological, unintended or random factors can

#### aid in coping with stressful life events (Sherman & Simonton, 2012) or low mood (Shrira et

#### al., 2015). Another proposed way it contributes to wellbeing is as a stress buffer (Hooker et

#### al., 2018b; Mascaro & Rosen, 2006). Hooker et al. concluded, based on their literature

#### review, that there is “support for the hypothesis that higher levels of meaning are associated

#### with dampened experiences of stress, thus supporting this pathway as a plausible link

#### between meaning and health” (Hooker et al., 2018b, p. 14). A third and final mechanism

#### suggested as a connection between health and meaning in life is health behaviours (ibid.).

#### Having meaning in life seems to guide people to make more healthy decisions like exercise

#### (Ruuskanen & Ruoppila, 1995), preventive health behaviours (contacting health care for

#### testing) (Kim et al., 2014), better sleep (Hamilton et al., 2007) as well as avoiding unhealthy

#### behaviours (Martin et al., 2011). Having a purpose in life is often mentioned as a motivating

#### factor, and more often comes up in connection with wellbeing and coping with difficult


```
Thoughts on Dying: Designing a Mortality probe to elicit reflections on existential meaning
```
#### situations. However, at least in the psychology discipline, purpose in life is considered as one

#### element of three that make up meaning in life (Miao et al., 2017), along with life significance

#### and coherence. Significance is associated with feeling that life is worth living and that it has

#### value in itself, while coherence is related to making sense of one’s life (Martela & Steger,

#### 2016).

#### Meaning thus can be seen as three components: life significance, coherence, and purpose,

#### and meaning seems in itself to improve wellbeing through coping mechanisms, mediating

#### the influence of stress and making healthier life choices. In addition to individual benefits of

#### meaning, Routledge and FioRito (2021b) have suggested that there might be more far-

#### reaching benefits on a societal level, e.g. community engagement, pro-social behaviours and

#### volunteering. However, in order for these effects to be present, one must be able to

#### perceive meaning in one’s life. This has been termed meaning salience (Hooker et al.,

#### 2018b), and refers to how present and vivid meaning is in one’s life. This is important since

#### one of the intentions of the mortality probe is to bring our unavoidable deaths into focus.

#### When people feel like things happen in their lives without their control; unpredictably and

#### without reason, people without a clear meaning in life react more negatively (Havranek et

#### al., 2016). Hence, actively engaging with meaning can perhaps be a way to deal better with

#### negative life events. Interestingly, bringing meaning into consideration can lead also to

#### thoughts of mortality (Taubman-Ben-Ari, 2011). Since this is what we actively want to do in

#### this study, we narrow down our focus towards existential meaning and mortality.

### 2.1 Existential meaning and mortality

#### The term existential meaning emphasizes that meaning is tied to existence, and the

#### comprehension of why we exist and what our purpose is. In a study using semi-structured

#### interviews with 37 people with increased risk of health problems in Sweden, the Public

#### Health Agency of Sweden (Folkhälsomyndigheten, 2025), found existential health to be

#### related to psychological health, where personal well-being, a sense of wellness, and the

#### ability to cope with psychological stress were central. Further, existential health was

#### considered to include both psychological and physical health, and was said to include finding

#### meaning in life, relating to death and a sense of belonging.

#### Being reminded of the finiteness of one’s life can increase the salience of mortality. In Terror

#### management theory (TMT), mortality salience is used to refer to states where people are

#### reminded about the inevitability of their deaths. The idea behind TMT is that people need a

#### way to deal with the terror of facing death and use coping mechanisms such as defending

#### cultural worldviews and boosting one’s self-esteem ways to manage anxiety and negative

#### emotions (Solomon & Greenberg, 2019). Increasing the salience of mortality can thus affect

#### behaviour and experiences, which has been studied extensively. For instance, mortality

#### salience influences have been reported for consumer behaviour (Gobrecht & Marchand,

#### 2023), anxiety levels (Maxfield et al., 2014), motivation for military service (Taubman-Ben-Ari

#### & Findler, 2006) as well as fostering various in-group preferences (Solomon & Greenberg,

#### 2019). However, the theory has gone through periods of more or less acceptance in the

#### research community (Pyszczynski et al., 2015) and the self-esteem bolstering has also failed

#### to show any effect of mortality salience in some recent cases (Sætrevik & Sjåstad, 2022;

#### Treger et al., 2023). Also, importantly for this study, having meaning in life seems to mitigate

#### the bolstering effects (Routledge & Juhl, 2010), indicating that death does not lead to as

#### much anxiety as for people without meaning.


_AUTHOR’S NAMES (LEAVE BLANK) [x Running head even]_

#### The salience of mortality increases with age and with age awareness, negative emotional

#### consequences may increase (Bergman & Bodner, 2020). Time in general seem to bring

#### mortality more into focus and has some effects on e.g. birthdays and significant landmarks

#### (Alter & Hershfield, 2014; Stickley et al., 2016). The notion of time evoking the need to

#### reflect on life and meaning is a known phenomenon in psychology, especially during

#### birthdays and significant landmarks (Alter & Hershfield, 2014). Especially in situations where

#### people are faced with mortality, religion is believed to be important for making sense and

#### coming to terms with death (Manning, 2018). But how about people without religious

#### affiliation? Not having religion does not mean that everyone has the same way to

#### conceptualise meaning: there are atheists, agnostics, humanists and a plethora of beliefs

#### that do not fall into a predefined religion.

### 2.2 Design probes and eliciting reflections

#### In this study we zoom in on one element of existential meaning – relating to death. We do so

#### through a design probe (Mattelmäki, 2006). Design probes consist of materials that are left

#### on site, with people whom you are interested in learning from or about. In early studies,

#### cultural probes (Gaver et al., 1999) were used to understand elderly people in diverse

#### communities and from other cultures. Design probes have three main characteristics: they

#### give participants an active role through self-documentation, they relate to people’s

#### experiences and contexts, and they have an exploratory character (Mattelmäki, 2006, p.40).

#### Even though the goal and purpose of design probes have often been on understanding and

#### gaining insights or inspiration from various groups of people (Wallace et al., 2013), they also

#### undoubtedly change the recipient and creator of probe content. In this study, our focus is

#### more on what happens on the side of the involved participant, than on what we are able to

#### do with the collected data as part of design research.

## 3. Research Methodology

#### The methodology section outlines the Research through Design (RtD) approach that frames

#### the creation, deployment and analysis of the Mortality probe. We first characterize the RtD

#### typology within the five ways of drifting classification of generated knowledge by RtD by

#### Krogh et al., (2015b), then detail the design of the probe as an artifact and finally describe

#### the process of its deployment and data analysis.

### 3.1 Probing typology of RtD

#### We present the Mortality probe as both a tool and as a knowledge-generating artifact

#### situated within an RtD approach. A succinct definition of RtD is the activity of

#### “conceptualizing research done by means of the skilful practice of design activity revealing

#### research insights (Krogh et al., 2015b, p. 41).” Krogh notes the importance of ‘drifting’ as a

#### desirable phenomenon in research and as a positive attribute of a designer. Drifting is

#### explained as the phenomenon where the research focus and experiments undergo

#### adjustments and evolutions. When looking at Krogh’s 5 classifications of generated

#### knowledge in RtD, our approach strays towards the ‘Probing’ typology which is the

#### exploration of design and its opportunities as they emerge during the design work.

#### Additionally, it is noted that fostering curiosity in neighbouring areas of research is seen as

#### important apart from the primary knowledge contribution. The probe (as seen in figure 1)


```
Thoughts on Dying: Designing a Mortality probe to elicit reflections on existential meaning
```
#### was one of three data collection activities in the first author’s thesis which began as an

#### exploration of ceremonial services, which then narrowed down to funerals and finally

#### ‘drifted’ to designing for existential meaning, where the probe played the part of eliciting

#### reflections on existential meaning.

_Figure 1 The mortality probe. (The background and the skull are AI generated)_

### 3.2 Reflections on age acting as a mortality reminder

#### To examine this phenomenon of age acting as a mortality reminder, a watchface was

#### designed that constantly shows the wearers current age in terms of years, months and days

#### as seen in figure 2.

_Figure 2 The mortality watchface design iterations and the final version running on an android
smartwatch._

#### The first author wore this watchface during the development of the probe and observed that

#### with long-term exposure to one’s age in years, months and days might make it into another

#### identifier of time, for example: Today is my 6th month, and 11th day versus today is the 24th

#### of September. This encouraged us to vary the time format in the final probe design to evoke

#### fresher perspectives. It was also noted that (subjectively) the potency of the mortality


_AUTHOR’S NAMES (LEAVE BLANK) [x Running head even]_

#### reminder was stronger at the first glance of the day and sporadically during unintentional

#### glances at the watchface.

### 3.3 Probe design decisions

#### The final probe was a 7.5-inch E-paper screen with a Raspberry Pico 2W, housed in a 3D-

#### printed desktop frame. The design choices were deliberate and intuitively made. The E-

#### paper screen was chosen for its ephemeral quality akin to paper, it’s low power consumption

#### and its similarity to a poster/photo frame, artifacts that we are used to having in our

#### peripheral vision. The desktop form (as seen in figure 3) allowed the probe to be situated in

#### the participant’s daily environment, such as a work desk or bedside table. The embedded

#### code was written with the aid of GenAI.

_Figure 3 The 3D-printed desktop frame of the Mortality probe._

#### A python flask-based webserver was used to manage the devices remotely. The server

#### featured a device management page, an image designer tool and a visual calendar to

#### schedule the images to be sent. This setup allowed the designer to accommodate changes to

#### the logistics of deployment, if needed. The python code was written with the aid of GenAI.

### 3.4 Probe content

#### The provocation in the probe’s content was two-fold. First, the mortality reminder: the

#### persistent, prominent display of the participant’s precise age which would change in its

#### format from years, months, days to total number of days or total number of weeks in

#### subsequent days. Second, the reflective questions: a 5-day sequence of existential prompts

#### that allude to mortality. This sequence was a key methodical choice, designed to take the

#### participant from abstract concepts like self-identity, reflections on meaningful music which

#### alludes to sensory legacy, situated memory with meaningful places, to more concrete

#### questions of evocative and formative events and finally to what they wish to be done to their

#### body.

### 3.5 Deployment and data collection

#### The probe was deployed with five participants (N=5). Convenience sampling was used due to

#### the sensitivity of the subject related to mortality and existential meaning. Participants were

#### recruited based on the following criteria: 1) they did not have a history and recent


```
Thoughts on Dying: Designing a Mortality probe to elicit reflections on existential meaning
```
#### experience with mental-health issues 2) they were willing to invest their time to interact

#### with the probe for 5 days.

#### Two participants were from the Humanisterna group with whom the first author worked

#### with for the thesis and all five either had a naturalistic worldview or were agnostic, this

#### detail allowed us to explore existential meaning within a secular framework. This is relevant

#### as Sweden is a highly secular country, has freedom of religion and the church is no longer

#### state-run since the year 2000. 51% of the population are members of the Church of Sweden,

#### with the second largest religion being Islam (SI, 2025), but many more are believed not to be

#### practicing any religion, even though there are many rituals and traditions originating in

#### Christianity. As one example of secularity, only 25% of weddings in Sweden are officiated by

#### the Church of Sweden in 2024, (compared to 80% in 1970; SI 2025).

#### The procedure involved an initial briefing on the sensitive nature of the topic, a 5-day in-situ

#### deployment where the probe presented one new prompt per day. Prior to the recruitment

#### the participants were presented with the goal and purpose of the study, they were explained

#### how they should use the probe and they were informed that they could opt out of the study

#### at any time, without any consequences. The participants were free to choose their own

#### mode of self-documentation.

#### Further, we conducted a round of member checking through follow-up interviews with 4 of

#### the 5 participants where we asked questions that validates design rationale and investigated

#### the nature of the probe’s effect and impact by asking about its long-term desirability,

#### whether the experience felt “constructive” versus “heavy”, and whether it inspired any

#### positive behaviour changes. We also explored potential design improvements and future

#### development directions, asking about long-term use, new features like a community sharing

#### feature and use cases in new contexts like on birthdays or yearly check-ins.

_Table 1 List of participants._

```
Participant code Age in years Language Mode of
documentation
```
```
P1 51 Swedish Physical Diary
```
```
P2 32 Swedish Digital notes
```
```
P3 24 English Digital notes
```
```
P4 41 English Blogpost draft
```
```
P5 22 Swedish Physical Diary
```
## 4. Results

#### The probe yielded a rich set of responses information in the form of reflections. The

#### responses reveal values, beliefs, sources of meaning and gives insights into the worldviews

#### of the participants. The results are sectioned into summaries and highlights from the

#### answers received for each existential prompt.


_AUTHOR’S NAMES (LEAVE BLANK) [x Running head even]_

_Figure 4 Collage of the probe in-situ with few of the participants_

### 4.1 Reflections on Identity

_Figure 5 The screen for Day 1_

#### Participants had diverse strategies for constructing meaning in response to this prompt.

#### Their approaches ranged from emphasis on actions and personality creating one’s essence

#### (P2) to a more deterministic, naturalistic view where identity is shaped by formative events

#### like loss (P4). P5 found their sense of self and purpose rooted not in individual creation but

#### in collectivist framework of heritage and family. P1’s analytical balance of nature and

#### nurture contrasts with P3’s outright refusal to answer which may signify an authentic

#### existential self-awareness of an identity not yet formed.

_Table 2 Summary of responses for existential prompt 1_

```
# Method of approach Underlying belief Signaled values
```
```
P1 Breaking down identity into
components of traits, values
and actions
```
```
A balance of nature and
nurture impacts creates
identity.
```
```
Explicitly mentioned
Equality, Human rights, Hard
work, Rebelliousness
```

```
Thoughts on Dying: Designing a Mortality probe to elicit reflections on existential meaning
```
```
P2 A set of positive and negative
personality traits
```
```
Personality and deeds as
identity
```
```
Explicitly mentioned
Kindness, thoughtfulness,
creativity, wisdom,
innovation, reasonableness
```
```
P3 Chose not to answer Identity not formed yet -
```
```
P4 Explained identity as a
function of our brain. A set of
likes and dislikes. Formative
events seen as identity
building
```
```
Naturalistic worldview,
value of literature
```
```
Mentioned inherited values,
philosophy and literature as
influential, loss of loved one
as formative
```
```
P5 Explained as a sum of family,
name, interests and place of
birth and growth
```
```
Value of Nationalism,
Heritage, Familial values
```
```
Importance of origins,
community and culture.
```
### 4.2 Reflections on sounds and music

_Figure 6 The screen for Day 2_

#### The purpose of the second question was to elicit reflections on the role of music; a sensory

#### medium often associated with the capacity of expressing complex emotions. Participant’s

#### approaches ranged from defining their life’s meaning through creative expression (P1’s

#### songs) to an absurdist stance, choosing to ‘dance’ in the face of chaos (P2). P3 grapples with

#### the very notion of a legacy, while P4 defines their existence by the emotional state they wish

#### to leave behind (laughter, happiness).

_Table 3 Summary of responses for existential prompt 2_


_AUTHOR’S NAMES (LEAVE BLANK) [x Running head even]_

```
# Method of approach Underlying belief Signaled values
```
```
P1 P1 is a songwriter and
chooses their songs as the
perfect sound
```
```
Capacity of music as a
medium of expression
```
```
Based on the contents of
the songs
```
```
P2 Chose specific genre of
transcendental cha-cha-cha
```
```
Life is chaotic and one
must dance
```
```
Absurdism, Positive outlook
in the face of hardship
```
```
P3 Declined to answer and
wishes not to be
remembered
```
```
Associates’ remembrance
with grief
```
```
Narcissistic to be wanted to
be remembered
```
```
P4 Associates’ songs and
audiobooks to life events.
Wants laughter to be heard
```
```
Positivity to deal with grief Happiness as a desired
state-of -mind
```
```
P5 Specific song – Stargazer by
Rainbow, and personal voice
```
```
Stargazer as the best song,
personal voice as unique
```
##### -

### 4.3 Reflections on physical locations

_Figure 7 The screen for Day_

#### A question to reflect on physical places and locations or a lack thereof. This is an opportunity

#### to reflect broadly on the spatial quality of existence, another aspect of a sensory legacy.

#### Again, diverse perspectives are seen. P1, explicitly detaches existential meaning from any

#### physical location, asserting that people are the sole source of meaning. This worldview

#### contrasts sharply with other participants who find their sense of self deeply intertwined with

#### specific environments such as spaces of family memory, creativity (P2); in the natural world

#### as a source of identity, solitude and introspection (P3, P4); or in their specific place of

#### nurture and childhood (P5).


```
Thoughts on Dying: Designing a Mortality probe to elicit reflections on existential meaning
```
_Table 4 Summary of responses for existential prompt 3_

# (^) **Method of approach Underlying belief Signaled values**
P1 (^) Dismissed the importance
of attaching importance to
specific physical locations
People are important,
not places. Although,
some artefacts like
mother’s cutlery have
attachment
Physical locations do not
matter
P2 (^) Mentioned specific places -
Summer evening on a
balcony, Trampoline at
parents’ house,
Makerspace
Ties with family, nature,
place of creative output
Peace, beauty, love,
creativity

#### P3 Specific places –

```
Hometown, beach sunrise,
jungle and nature
```
```
Origins as part of
identity, relation to
nature as integral
```
```
Solitude, silence, majesty
of nature.
```
P4 (^) Specific typology of places

- Places with water, cycling
to water

```
Relation to nature,
ability of nature to evoke
introspection
```
```
Peace and introspection
```
P5 (^) Specific village and place of
birth and childhood
Place of nurture as part
of identity

##### -

### 4.4 Reflections on formative events and life story

_Figure 8 The screen for Day_

#### This existential prompt delves into the narrative construction of existential meaning, asking

#### participants to curate their life story by selecting formative events. It explores how

#### individuals make sense of the past and the future. P1, P2 construct their existential story

#### from a blend of key personal achievements (art, academics, career) and profound relational


_AUTHOR’S NAMES (LEAVE BLANK) [x Running head even]_

#### events (love and loss). In contrast, P3’s narrative is defined by major life transitions and

#### social engagement (migration, activism), where meaning is derived from knowledge and

#### external awareness.

_Table 5 Summary of responses for existential prompt 4_

```
# Method of approach Underlying sources Signaled values
P1 Timeline of events –
sickness, loss of loved ones,
pregnancies, academic
achievements, artworks,
mean boss ...
```
```
Family, friends, relation
with work, art, marriage,
academics, career,
improv skill
```
```
Importance of academic
impact, hardships, social
impact, career growth and
work life
```
```
P2 Specific events – First kiss,
First 3d print, first
successful project, loss of
loved ones
```
```
Relationships, Success in
work, Loss and grief
```
```
Love, Creativity, Career
success, Loss and grief
```
```
P3 Specific events – Moving to
Sweden, taking family
responsibilities during
COVID
Origin story of interest in
psychology
```
```
Mental health awareness
activism, love for
knowledge, death of
father
```
```
Knowledge, activism, loss
and grief
```
```
P4 Sequence of happy and sad
milestones, academic
failure, loss of child, grief,
marital bond strengthening,
learning from joy and pain
```
```
Positivity to deal with
grief, tough experiences
as character building
```
```
Learning as the goal
instead of happiness.
```
```
P5 Happy times with friends
and family
```
```
Sense of humor,
companionship
```
```
Importance of friendship
and humor
```
### 4.5 Preferences for corpse handling

_Figure 9 The screen for Day_


```
Thoughts on Dying: Designing a Mortality probe to elicit reflections on existential meaning
```
#### A straightforward question about funeral preferences with respect to the body. This

#### question was the last in the sequence as it has the strongest connotation to the death of the

#### self. We see three viewpoints for assigning meaning to this final act. The first is a utilitarian

#### viewpoint where the body’s value persists through organ donation (P1, P4) or by

#### contributing to scientific knowledge (P2). The second is an ecological viewpoint where

#### meaning is found in rejoining the ‘natural cycle of life’ (P3). Finally, P5 represents a spiritual

#### framework with a wish for an afterlife.

_Table 6 Summary of responses for existential prompt 5_

```
# Preference Underlying belief
P1 Donate organs and dispose of rest in
an eco-friendly way
```
```
Utility of organs, environmental
friendliness
P2 Donate for medical research Importance of science and
knowledge
P3 Body to nourish earth, with a
memorial in hometown
```
```
Ode to natural cycle of life,
```
```
P4 Donate organs, want a physical grave
as a place for enabling grief
processing
```
```
Utility, empathy for others who
will grieve P
```
```
P5 Wishes for an afterlife, no
preferences for corpse, it will rot
away
```
```
Wish to persist in joy and
harmony
```
### 4.7 Follow up interview

#### Participants reflected back on the experience with terms such as “fruitful”, and “felt good

#### like journalling or meditation”. P3 noted that reflecting on difficult topics relating to non-

#### existence brought a sense of “calmness, in a soothing way” and P4 affirmed the probe’s

#### positive value calling it a “great experience”. In terms of pro-social behaviour, P2 reported

#### that they signed up as an organ donor as the result of their reflections and P4 began work on

#### consolidating their will.

## 5. Discussion

### 5.1 Reflections on the probe design decisions and analysis

#### The aim of this study was to explore how can we design for existential meaning to inform

#### existential well-being as a relevant design space. We explored the mortality probe in the

#### secular context partly because the probe was designed and deployed in the context of a

#### thesis project where the Humanists of Sweden were the focus group and partly from the

#### intention to explore existential meaning outside the context of religious systems. We

#### developed a mortality probe to explore how it can support the emergence of existential

#### meaning through reflections about mortality. Our findings show that the probe elicited a rich

#### variety of perspectives on existential meaning related to self-identity, sensory legacy and

```
Formatted Table
```

_AUTHOR’S NAMES (LEAVE BLANK) [x Running head even]_

#### situated memories such as places and evocative life events. Feedback from the participants

#### verified the thought-provoking and introspective nature of the Mortality probe. Secular

#### approaches to constructing existential meaning here included meaning through formative

#### events, or by collectivism or deterministic, naturalistic views. Also, creative expression,

#### absurdism, legacy and leaving behind emotional states. For the participants, a sense of self

#### was connected to spaces with personal significance, solitude and introspection. In creating

#### meaning, events of achievement or profound relational meaning and social engagements,

#### where meaning is derived from knowledge and external awareness, were said to play a big

#### part. When asked about the experience, participants reported that their engagement with

#### the probe elicited reflection on sources of existential meaning related to their identity and

#### worldview. They reflected on various things ranging from their personality traits to values

#### related to their nurture, creative expression and nature. Second, increasing mortality

#### awareness elicited by the probe enabled not only reflections about existential meaning but

#### had concrete outcomes since it facilitated articulation of wishes, preferences and behaviours

#### surrounding mortality. For example, after using the probe P2 registered as an organ donor,

#### while P4 began engaging in consolidating their will in order not to put themselves in a

#### situation like the one they have experienced after their father’s passing. This implies that

#### guided introspection enabled by the probe could influence both individual well-being and

#### pro-social behaviour. Finally, the findings also indicate that the mortality probe was

#### successful in its purpose of producing a balanced level of mortality salience, i.e. awareness of

#### one’s own inevitable death, that enabled participants to engage in meaningful reflections.

#### Participants did not report increased death anxiety after using the probe which indicates

#### that the probe itself could be considered a fruitful tool for proactive coping (Miao et al.,

#### 2017) especially in the population with lower risk of mental health conditions.

#### This study provides two main contributions. First, by presenting the design of the mortality

#### probe, we contribute to the growing literature on probes as a design method. Following

#### Krogh et al., 2015, this probe aimed to provide new context for reflecting on existential

#### meaning and mortality. That intention, as well as provocation described my Mattelmäki

#### (2006b), was intentionally implemented in the design decisions of having a clock-like device

#### with an e-paper interface. We have learned that these choices contributed to blending of the

#### device in the participants environment making it easier for them to engage with the probe.

#### We have also learned that the timing of the exposure to the daily prompt and

#### personalization influenced engagement. Member checking that was done in the follow-up

#### interviews revealed that participants felt inspired since they were willing to share numerous

#### ideas about how this probe could be turned into a product.

#### Our second contribution is towards the growing literature within the design for well-being.

#### In this study we argue that existential meaning is an important concept to be explored in the

#### design for well-being space. By designing a mortality probe, we gathered empirical insights

#### and showed that questions about mortality and death can result in rich individual reflections

#### about one’s purpose as well as promote pro-social behaviours. This is consistent to the

#### literature on existential meaning in connection to mental health showing that existential

#### meaning elicits both individual and societal benefits (Routledge and Fiorito, 2021).

### 5.2 Conclusion


```
Thoughts on Dying: Designing a Mortality probe to elicit reflections on existential meaning
```
#### Our experience with the Mortality probe really emphasised to us that there is a need and an

#### open space for eliciting reflections in a curated, controlled context, at least in the secular

#### context of this work. Unlike how mortality is made salient in online environments and social

#### media, which seem to only focus on the edge cases and creating an emotional, often

#### negative response. In the words or participant 1: “Figuring out life’s meaning, I don’t need an

#### answer, I just need to talk about it”. We also feel that the values, beliefs and worldviews that

#### come out of the probe can be useful during design within the context of existential meaning.

#### The probe could be further developed for long term, more personalized deployments in

#### areas such as therapy and end-of-life planning albeit with the guidance and supervision of

#### trained professionals.

```
Acknowledgements: [Leave blank for initial submission]
```
## 6. References

Alter, A. L., & Hershfield, H. E. (2014). People search for meaning when they approach a new decade
in chronological age. _Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences_ , _111_ (48), 17066–17070.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.

Bergman, Y. S., & Bodner, E. (2020). Age is not just a number: Age awareness, subjective nearness-to-
death, self-esteem, and depressive symptoms among older adults. _Aging & Mental Health_ , _24_ (6),
906 –913. https://doi.org/10.1080/13607863.2019.

Folkhälsomyndigheten. (2025). _Existentiell hälsa och folkhälsa – Slutredovisning_ (No. 25033; p. 39).
https://www.folkhalsomyndigheten.se/publikationer-och-
material/publikationsarkiv/e/existentiell-halsa-och-folkhalsa-slutredovisning/

Gaver, B., Dunne, T., & Pacenti, E. (1999). Design: Cultural probes. _Interactions_ , _6_ (1), 21–29.
https://doi.org/10.1145/291224.

Gobrecht, F., & Marchand, A. (2023). The finitude of life—How mortality salience affects consumer
behavior: A review. _Journal of Consumer Behaviour_ , _22_ (1), 199–216.
https://doi.org/10.1002/cb.

Hamilton, N. A., Nelson, C. A., Stevens, N., & Kitzman, H. (2007). Sleep and psychological well-being.
_Social Indicators Research_ , _82_ (1), 147–163. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11205-006-9030- 1

Havranek, M. M., Bolliger, B., Roos, S., Pryce, C. R., Quednow, B. B., & Seifritz, E. (2016).
Uncontrollable and unpredictable stress interacts with subclinical depression and anxiety scores in
determining anxiety response. _Stress_ , _19_ (1), 53–62.
https://doi.org/10.3109/10253890.2015.

Hooker, S. A., Masters, K. S., & Park, C. L. (2018a). A Meaningful Life is a Healthy Life: A Conceptual
Model Linking Meaning and Meaning Salience to Health. _Review of General Psychology_ , _22_ (1), 11–

24. https://doi.org/10.1037/gpr

Hooker, S. A., Masters, K. S., & Park, C. L. (2018b). A Meaningful Life is a Healthy Life: A Conceptual
Model Linking Meaning and Meaning Salience to Health. _Review of General Psychology_ , _22_ (1), 11–

24. https://doi.org/10.1037/gpr

Kim, E. S., Strecher, V. J., & Ryff, C. D. (2014). Purpose in life and use of preventive health care
services. _Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences_ , _111_ (46), 16331–16336.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.

Krogh, P. G., Markussen, T., & Bang, A. L. (2015a). Ways of Drifting—Five Methods of
Experimentation in Research Through Design. In A. Chakrabarti (Ed.), _ICoRD’15 – Research into_


_AUTHOR’S NAMES (LEAVE BLANK) [x Running head even]_

```
Design Across Boundaries Volume 1 (pp. 39–50). Springer India. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-81-
322 -2232-3_
```
Krogh, P. G., Markussen, T., & Bang, A. L. (2015b). Ways of Drifting—Five Methods of
Experimentation in Research Through Design. In A. Chakrabarti (Ed.), _ICoRD’15 – Research into
Design Across Boundaries Volume 1_ (pp. 39–50). Springer India. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-81-
322 -2232-3_

Manning, C. (2018). Meaning Making Narratives among Non-Religious Individuals Facing the End of
Life. In _New Dimensions in Spirituality, Religion, and Aging_. Routledge.

Martela, F., & Steger, M. F. (2016). The three meanings of meaning in life: Distinguishing coherence,
purpose, and significance. _The Journal of Positive Psychology_ , _11_ (5), 531–545.
https://doi.org/10.1080/17439760.2015.

Martin, R. A., MacKinnon, S., Johnson, J., & Rohsenow, D. J. (2011). Purpose in life predicts treatment
outcome among adult cocaine abusers in treatment. _Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment_ , _40_ (2),
183 –188. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsat.2010.10.

Mascaro, N., & Rosen, D. H. (2006). The Role of Existential Meaning as a Buffer Against Stress. _Journal
of Humanistic Psychology_ , _46_ (2), 168–190. https://doi.org/10.1177/

Mattelmäki, T. (2006). _Design probes_. Aalto University.
https://aaltodoc.aalto.fi/handle/123456789/

Maxfield, M., John, S., & Pyszczynski, T. (2014). A Terror Management Perspective on the Role of
Death-Related Anxiety in Psychological Dysfunction. _The Humanistic Psychologist_ , _42_ (1), 35–53.
https://doi.org/10.1080/08873267.2012.

Miao, M., Zheng, L., & Gan, Y. (2017). Meaning in Life Promotes Proactive Coping via Positive Affect:
A Daily Diary Study. _Journal of Happiness Studies_ , _18_ (6), 1683–1696.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10902- 016 -9791-

Pyszczynski, T., Solomon, S., & Greenberg, J. (2015). Thirty Years of Terror Management Theory. In
_Advances in Experimental Social Psychology_ (Vol. 52, pp. 1–70). Elsevier.
https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.aesp.2015.03.

Reker, G. T. (2000). Theoretical Perspective, Dimensions, and Measurement of Existential Meaning. In
G. Reker & K. Chamberlain, _Exploring Existential Meaning: Optimizing Human Development across
the Life Span_ (pp. 39–56). SAGE Publications, Inc. https://doi.org/10.4135/9781452233703.n

Routledge, C., & FioRito, T. A. (2021a). Why Meaning in Life Matters for Societal Flourishing. _Frontiers
in Psychology_ , _11_ , 601899. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.

Routledge, C., & FioRito, T. A. (2021b). Why Meaning in Life Matters for Societal Flourishing. _Frontiers
in Psychology_ , _11_. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.

Routledge, C., & Juhl, J. (2010). When death thoughts lead to death fears: Mortality salience
increases death anxiety for individuals who lack meaning in life. _Cognition and Emotion_ , _24_ (5),
848 –854. https://doi.org/10.1080/

RUUSKANEN, J. M., & RUOPPILA, I. (1995). Physical Activity and Psychological Well-being among
People Aged 65 to 84 Years. _Age and Ageing_ , _24_ (4), 292–296.
https://doi.org/10.1093/ageing/24.4.

Sætrevik, B., & Sjåstad, H. (2022). Mortality salience effects fail to replicate in traditional and novel
measures. _Meta-Psychology_ , _6_. https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2020.


```
Thoughts on Dying: Designing a Mortality probe to elicit reflections on existential meaning
```
Sherman, A. C., & Simonton, S. (2012). Effects of personal meaning among patients in primary and
specialized care: Associations with psychosocial and physical outcomes. _Psychology & Health_ ,
_27_ (4), 475–490. https://doi.org/10.1080/08870446.2011.

Shrira, A., Shmotkin, D., Palgi, Y., Soffer, Y., Hamama Raz, Y., Tal-Katz, P., Ben-Ezra, M., & Benight, C.
C. (2015). How Do Meaning in Life and Positive Affect Relate to Adaptation to Stress? The Case of
Firefighters Following the Mount Carmel Forest Fire. _The Israel Journal of Psychiatry and Related
Sciences_ , _52_ (3), 68–70.

Solomon, S., & Greenberg, J. (2019). Existential Meaning and Terror Management. In S. Solomon & J.
Greenberg, _Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Psychology_. Oxford University Press.
https://doi.org/10.1093/acrefore/9780190236557.013.

Stickley, A., Sheng Ng, C. F., Inoue, Y., Yazawa, A., Koyanagi, A., Kodaka, M., DeVylder, J. E., &
Watanabe, C. (2016). Birthdays are associated with an increased risk of suicide in Japan: Evidence
from 27,007 deaths in Tokyo in 2001–2010. _Journal of Affective Disorders_ , _200_ , 259–265.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2016.04.

Taubman - Ben-Ari, O. (2011). Is the Meaning of Life Also the Meaning of Death? A Terror
Management Perspective Reply. _Journal of Happiness Studies_ , _12_ (3), 385–399.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10902- 010 -9201-

Taubman-Ben-Ari, O., & Findler, L. (2006). Motivation for Military Service: A Terror Management
Perspective. _Military Psychology_ , _18_ (2), 149–159. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327876mp1802_

Tibbles, A., & Nickpour, F. (2022, June 25). _Design meets death: A first systematic mapping review of
design contributions to end of life field_. DRS2022: Bilbao. https://doi.org/10.21606/drs.2022.

Treger, S., Benau, E. M., & Timko, C. A. (2023). Not so terrifying after all? A set of failed replications of
the mortality salience effects of Terror Management Theory. _PLOS ONE_ , _18_ (5), e0285267.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.

Wallace, J., McCarthy, J., Wright, P. C., & Olivier, P. (2013). Making design probes work. _Proceedings
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems_ , 3441–3450.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2470654.

#### About the Authors:

```
Author 1 [Leave blank for initial submission]
```
```
Author 2 [Leave blank for initial submission]
```
```
Author 3 [Leave blank for initial submission]
```

